DOCSP-41965: Read and write settings (#146)
mongodb/docs-php-library: source/read-write-pref.txt

.. _php-read-write-pref:

===============================================
Specify How CRUD Operations Run on Replica Sets
===============================================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta:: 
   :keywords: customize, preferences, replica set, consistency

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use the **write concern**, **read concern**, and

> **read preference** configurations to modify the way that MongoDB runs

Reviewer: Q: is mongodb the right subject here? or the library

> In this guide, you can learn how to use the **write concern**, **read concern**, and
> **read preference** configurations to modify the way that MongoDB runs
> create, read, update, and delete (CRUD) operations on replica sets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, you can learn how to configure **write concern**, **read concern**, and
**read preference** options to modify the way that MongoDB runs
create, read, update, and delete (CRUD) operations on replica sets.
```

> 

Reviewer: S: it would be useful to link to manual pages very early in the page so that users can see the setting values for each option

You can set write concern, read concern, and read preference options at the following
levels:

- Client, which sets the *default for all operation executions* unless overridden
- Session
- Transaction
- Database
- Collection

This list also indicates the increasing order of precedence of the option settings. For

> example, if you set a read concern level for a transaction, it will override a read
> concern level set for the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
example, if you set a read concern level for a transaction, it will override a read
concern level inherited from the client.
```

These options allow you to customize the causal consistency and availability of the data
in your replica sets.

.. _php-read-write-config:

Configure Read and Write Operations
-----------------------------------

You can control how the library routes read operations by setting a read preference.

> You can also control how the library waits for acknowledgment of read and write operations
> on a replica set by setting a read and write concern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also control how the library waits for acknowledgment of read and write operations
on a replica set by setting read and write concerns.
```

This section shows how to configure the read preference, read concern, and write

> concern at various levels by passing an options array parameter to the following
> methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
concern at various levels by passing an options array parameter to any one of the following
methods:
```

.. literalinclude:: /includes/read-write-pref.php
    :language: php
    :dedent:
    :start-after: start-client-settings
    :end-before: end-client-settings

Alternatively, you can specify the read and write settings in the connection
URI, which is passed as a parameter to the ``MongoDB\Client`` constructor:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/read-write-pref.php
    :language: php
    :dedent:
    :start-after: start-client-settings-uri
    :end-before: end-client-settings-uri

.. _php-read-write-session:

Session Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This example shows how to set the read preference, read concern, and
write concern of a session by passing an array to the ``startSession()``
method. The code configures the following settings:

- ``PRIMARY_PREFERRED`` read preference: Read operations retrieve data from 
  the primary replica set member, or secondary members if the primary is unavailable
- ``LOCAL`` read concern: Read operations return the instance's most recent data 
  without guaranteeing that the data has been written to a majority of the replica
  set members
- ``MAJORITY`` write concern: The majority of all replica set members
  must acknowledge the write operation

> 

Reviewer: S; remove extra line

.. literalinclude:: /includes/read-write-pref.php
    :language: php
    :dedent:
    :start-after: start-session-settings
    :end-before: end-session-settings

> 

Reviewer: S: somewhere in this section you can note that you must instantiate the appropriate type to set the options (compared to client which took strings)

Reviewer: Or perhaps that info can go in client section and just inform that the syntax is different only for client

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This example shows how to set the read preference, read concern, and
write concern of a collection called ``test_collection`` by passing an options
array to the ``selectCollection()`` method. The code configures the following settings:

- ``SECONDARY_PREFERRED`` read preference: Read operations retrieve data from 
  secondary replica set members, or the primary members if no secondaries are available
- ``AVAILABLE`` read concern: Read operations return the instance's most recent data 
  without guaranteeing that the data has been written to a majority of the replica
  set members
- ``0`` write concern: Requests no acknowledgment of the write operation

.. literalinclude:: /includes/read-write-pref.php
    :language: php
    :dedent:
    :start-after: start-collection-settings
    :end-before: end-collection-settings

.. _php-read-write-advanced:

Advanced Read Configurations 
----------------------------

This section shows how to further customize your read operation
settings in the following ways:

- :ref:`Apply a tag set <php-tag-sets>`
- :ref:`Specify a local threshold <php-local-threshold>`

.. _php-tag-sets:

Tag Sets
~~~~~~~~

> In {+mdb-server+}, you can apply key-value :manual:`tags

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {+mdb-server+} allows you to apply key-value :manual:`tags
```

</core/read-preference-tags/>` to replica-set
members according to any criteria you choose. You can then use
those tags to target one or more members for a read operation.

By default, the {+php-library+} ignores tags when choosing a member
to read from. To instruct the {+php-library+} to prefer certain tags,
pass them as a parameter to your ``MongoDB\Driver\ReadPreference`` class
constructor. Then, set the ``MongoDB\Driver\ReadPreference`` object as
the value of the ``readPreference`` database option.

> 

Reviewer: S: before the next paragraph, you could include a sentence here like:

> Suppose you are connected to a replica set that contains members hosted at multiple data centers across the USA.

This code example sets the ``readPreference`` option to a tag set
that instructs ``test_database`` to prefer reads from secondary replica set
members in the following order:

1. Members from the New York data center (``['dc' => 'ny']``)
#. Members from the San Francisco data center (``['dc' => 'sf']``)
#. Any secondary members (``[]``)

.. literalinclude:: /includes/databases-collections/databases-collections.php
    :language: php
    :dedent:
    :start-after: start-tag-set

>     :end-before: end-tag-set

Reviewer: S: indentation error
